---
layout: post
title: "Blogging with Octopress"
date: 2014-03-02 01:49:11 +0530
comments: true
categories: [Blogging,Octopress]
---

For a long time I really wanted to start a blog. So, I was thinking about what platform to choose. Now I had a great number of options, and to choose one of them, it was more difficult than I thought. So I figured its only fitting, the first blog I write, should be about **How to deploy a pro blog**. Well that too in just 5 minutes.

<!-- more -->

####Now these are the typical options one have  

1. To use dynamic content(by dynamic I mean use a database and save the blog post there). You can either use [Wordpress](http://www.wordpress.org), or Blogger or any other site, or you can make your own blogging site(if you can).  

2. To use static pages generated by a script(now this is really awesome).

There are pros and cons to both methods, but in my view I really liked the static pages method, and I will tell you why

* [WordPress](http://www.wordpress.org) is very good, but it’s over-featured for what I(or most of us) need, and its PHP/MySQL guts are opaque. On top of that i don’t really like the idea of all my writing being inside a big database either; it’s a single point of failure, and that makes me uneasy.
* These dynamic sites become unresponsive if you have large contents unless you use some caching plugins, thats not a problem with static pages.
* There are already some great framework to generate static blogging pages like [Octopress](http://octopress.org/) which is built around [Jekyll](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll).
* I have the entire site as static pages that means its easy to take backup. I can put entire site in source control (git, actually), and so I can do branches and look back at revisions and so on.
* If I want to use my text editor I can do that.I can search my sites locally via Spotlight(and grep and find). Also, since it generates static pages, I can move from one web-host to another very, very easily.

So thats why I chose Octopress. Now getting into deployment part. **5 minutes and you will have a pro blog**.

###Installing Ruby

Octopress uses ruby so you should have ruby pre-installed or you can use these commands to install it(I am assuming you are using ubuntu or any other debian based linux).
```
sudo apt-get install ruby 1.9.3
```
###Installing Git
You should also have Git pre-installed, if it is not you can install it using the given command
```
sudo apt-get install git
```
###Installing Octopress
```
cd ~ #or wherever u want the octopress folder to be located
git clone git://github.com/imathis/octopress.git octopress
cd octopress
gem install bundler
rbenv rehash #only if using rbenv
bundle install
```
Now install the default Octopress theme
```
rake install
```
That's it. Now you just need to deploy it. There are several option available you can use github pages,heroku or Rsync. Heroku is my personal favorite.

###Deploying to Heroku
If you don't already have a Heroku account, [create one](https://api.heroku.com/signup), it's free. Then install the Heroku toolbelt.

```
wget -qO- https://toolbelt.heroku.com/install-ubuntu.sh | sh #again assuming you are using ubuntu
```

now create a heroku app for deployment. If this is your first time it will ask your credentials and automatically upload your ssh key.
```
heroku create
```
Edit the .gitignore(this is used by git to ignore files) in the root of your repository and remove public. This will let you add generated content for deploying it to Heroku.

Now push the changes to heroku.
```
rake generate
git add .
git commit -m 'site updated'
git push heroku master 
```
That's it you just deployed your blogging site. you can open the url given by heroku and check it out.Now you have to [configure](http://octopress.org/docs/configuring/) it as per your liking